>> Brian Holt: So we have API requests
in a bunch of our various different
components.
You have two choices here, and
I'm gonna say you actually
really only have one choice.
But in theory,
you could spin up your API and
you could have it make real requests
to a fake API or something like that.
Don't do that,
it usually ends in heartache.
[LAUGH] so in that case, you probably
wanna mock it, make mock requests so
that it goes to make a request and then
it just gets faked an answer back to it.
That's what I'm gonna
teach you how to do now.
So we're gonna npm install
vitest-fetch-mock@0.3.0.
We didn't have to use vitest-fetch-mock,
it's actually really easy
to do directly with vitest.
It just adds some niceties and I just
didn't wanna make you code all that stuff,
so we're just gonna stick with it.
Let's write the code for testing,
>> Brian Holt: We're
gonna test the contact page.
So let's go create another
test file in here,
and this one gets to be called
something that's kind of silly,
it's contact.lazy.test.jsx.
>> Brian Holt: And
if you're looking at it as like,
that is the dumbest name of a file
that I've ever created, just wait,
we're about to do one that's even sillier,
but why?
Well, lazy, it's being dependent on
that for React or a TanStack router.
And test, it's being dependent on that for
the testing suite.
So this is why I kinda get a little
hesitant about should file
names be significant?
Cuz then you end up with silly stuff like
this, which obviously this is silly, but
here we are, we're gonna use it anyway.
So import render from
@testing-library/react,
import, expect, test, and
another one here called vi
that we're gonna talk about.
I promise you, it is not Vim,
it is is different than that.
And in any case, I will show you
how to get out of it afterwards.
Import createFetchMock
from vitest-fetch-mock,
import QueryClientProvider and
QueryClient from tanstackrouter, sorry,
tanstackquery, rather QueryClient.
>> Brian Holt: And
import Route from ../routes/contact.lazy.
>> Brian Holt: So why are we
importing stuff from ReactQuery?
That seems kinda strange, right?
Well, it's because in order for ReactQuery
to function, it depends on a QueryClient
being there, and we're not rendering
it in the context of app, right?
An app is what actually
possesses the QueryClient.
So we have to create a fake one for it.
It's not a fake one, it's actually a real
one, but we have to create one for it.
So that's exactly what
we're gonna do here.
We're gonna say const QueryClient,
>> Brian Holt: = new QueryClient.
>> Brian Holt: Okay,
let's talk about vi for a second.
Vi is the name of the spy
library inside of vitest.
So if you've ever used sinon in old React
testing, I guess it's still current,
you can still use sinon in lots of stuff,
it's the same idea.
But it's basically a thing that's like,
all right,
I'm gonna create a fake version of this,
and then I'm gonna ask later, it's like,
did this get called,
what functions does this gets called with?
That's called spying in testing and
that's what vi does for you.
So we're gonna say const
fetchMocker = createFetchMock(vi).
And this is gonna kind of
fetchMocker.enableMocks.
What this does is it goes and monkey
patches fetch to be now testable, right?
It's not actually gonna
go call really the API,
it's just going to fake like it did,
right?
And now what's cool about that is we can
say, hey fetch, what were you called with?
And that's a good thing for
us because now we can go back and say,
did you call the right API?
Did you do the right things given
that kinds of inputs, right?
That's the point.
All right, so we're gonna say
test can submit contact form.
Seems like a pretty good test, right?
Async function,
>> Brian Holt: And
this one's gonna have a little bit more,
but we're gonna do actually simulated
test events, which is gonna be cool.
>> Brian Holt: All right, so
first thing we're gonna say, fetchMocker,
mockResponse once and
not just mockResponse.
>> Brian Holt: I don't think it matters
cuz we're only gonna call it once.
In any case, basically you're
saying to the fetchMocker is,
hey, if you get called,
respond with this from the API.
>> Brian Holt: Because we know only one
API is gonna be called in the course of
this, we don't have to really think too
much about which one was called and
why and that kind of stuff.
But I can imagine, let's say you have
something that has nine different API
calls, you have to get a bit
more specific, all right?
To this route, respond with this,
to this route, respond with this.
We don't have to care too much about that,
so we're not going to.
>> Brian Holt: All right, and
then this is gonna be just status ok cuz
that's what the API responds with now.
All right,
we're gonna say const screen = render.
And remember,
we have to give it a QueryClientProvider.
And a QueryClient = as you might guess,
QueryClient.
>> Brian Holt: And we're gonna say
Route.options.component.
So why this kind of strangeness?
Well, if you remember from contact here,
what gets exported is actually
this lazy file route,
which has a bunch of machinery around
it that the TanStack router uses.
We don't need that,
we just need the component.
So that's why we're doing
the Route.options.component,
that's where that comes from.
All right now let's simulate
all of our input events.
So we're gonna say const
nameInput = screen.
And when you can do getByPlaceholder,
I was like,
that seems like actually
a pretty appropriate one,
because that's something that
the user would experience, right?
And we'll do three of those.
And we'll do emailInput, email.
>> Brian Holt: And it msgTextArea,
>> Brian Holt: And it is Message.
All right, so now we have handles on
all of our various different inputs,
and we're going to put
some test data together.
Const testData = put
whatever you want in here,
I'll just put Brian, email,
dustinshatemamail@example.com.
And message just let Brian teach, Dustin.
So I'm gonna say nameInput.value
is assigned testData.name.
And again,
we're gonna do that three times.
The emailInput is gonna be email, and
the msgTextArea is going to be message.
Again, this would just be like
a user filling out a form, right?
All right, after they fill out the form,
what do they do next?
Click the button.
Const btn = screen.getBy
what, role, getByRole.
Button's a pretty good role, there's
only one button on the page as we know.
What are you gonna do with a button?
Click,
>> Brian Holt: Kind
of a cool feature, right?
>> Brian Holt: Now,
this one's kind of cool, I like this.
Let's just go do it on our page and
see what happens.
>> Brian Holt: Okay, how do we know
that our page was submitted correctly?
>> Brian Holt: What did we do wrong here?
>> Speaker 2: Your server's not running.
>> Brian Holt: Is it not?
It's not, you're right.
>> Brian Holt: I'm not gonna
get it running right now, but
what would eventually happen is
the submitted shows up, right?
That's what you would
expect to show up here.
But it's not instant, right?
It goes to the loading state, and
then eventually it settles in
an h3 of saying submitted.
But we know that the entire process
went through once that h3 shows up.
So what you can say is you can say
const h3 = await screen.findByRole.
We're looking for
a heading of level three which is another
way of saying level three or h3, right?
>> Brian Holt: This await means hey,
this isn't gonna show up right away, but
wait for this.
Wait for it to happen.
Once this shows up and
it just pulls it, right?
So is it there now, is it there now?
And once it's there it's to be like, okay,
cool, here you go and here is your h3.
And then if it never finds it, it's
gonna error out because it says, well,
you wanted this and
it never showed up, right?
Now we can just say, expect
(h3.innerText).toContain("Submitted").
toContain is nice here rather than toBe.
If you remember I think it actually is
submitted with an explanation point.
I just care that it that shows
them that it was submitted, right?
So that's why I'm gonna do
contain instead of toBe.
Some people might argue you're good,
you did it, you can stop here.
I wanna go further and I wanna say did
they call the API with the right thing?
I think that's user facing, because if it
doesn't call the API with the right thing,
the user's data is getting lost, right?
There are people that would argue
that testing the API endpoint and
the data is implementation details and
shouldn't be tested.
And I mean, they're wrong,
and that's okay, right?
Not everyone gets to be right all
the time, except me, because I'm teaching.
So we're gonna test that,
requests = fetchMocker.requests and
this is gonna give you back
everything that it got.
So the first thing I'm gonna say, if you
got more than one call, what happened?
expect(requests.length).toBe(1),
>> Brian Holt: And then I'm gonna make
sure that it called the right thing,
(requests[0], it's the first thing,
right, .url).toBe,
to be make sure that it called
the right one, ("/api/contact");.
expect(fetchMocker) and then you say
.toHaveBeenCalledWith("/api/contact"), and
then you give it what you expected
to have been called with.
So it's going to be body: JSON.stringify.
This one I'm gonna say,
this is getting dangerously
close to implementation details.
But headers: Content-Type":
"application/json" and
method: "POST".
>> Brian Holt: Nope,
don't do that, "POST".
>> Brian Holt: So this is basically
saying, I expect when they called fetch
they called it with this,
the correct URL and the right testData,
headers to be correct method: "POST",
all that kind of stuff.
So again, let's go ahead and
say npm test and see what happens.
Failed the test,
let's go see what happened.
So useMutation, no QueryClient set, did I?
I thought I did.
>> Brian Holt: It's client,
not QueryClient.
So bear with me a second,
come back up here.
I said QueryClient = QueryClient,
right there.
This is actually just
supposed to be client.
>> Brian Holt: This is something
that if we had TypeScript,
it would have yelled at us right away.
So that is one of the nice
things about TypeScript.
Yeah, TypeScript will immediately say when
you don't pass in the right props that
it expects.
It's one of the nicest things about
writing React with TypeScript.
Okay, nameInput = screen.
getAll, I don't want getAll,
I want getByPlaceholderText.
>> Brian Holt: getByPlaceholderText.
I'm surprised that actually works,
>> Brian Holt: Cuz
otherwise it will get all of them and
it gives you an array of them.
>> Brian Holt: But I guess you can
set .value on an array, right?
It's not gonna yell about that.
It's just weird.
But let's see, did that, fix it?
It did fix it, okay.